.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH GSI/GSC 1 "June 3, 2009" "4.4.3" "User Commands"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
gsi \- Gambit-C Scheme Interpreter and Compiler
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gsi 
[
-\fB:\fP\fIarg\fP,... ] 
[
.B \-f
]
[
.B \-v
] 
[[\-] 
[
.B \-e
] 
[
.I file
]]...
.br
.B gsc 
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ files ]
.br
.PP
\fBgsc-script, gsi-script, scheme-ieee-1178-1990, scheme-r4rs, scheme-srfi-0,
six\fP, and \fBsix-script\fP: currently synonyms for \fBgsi\fP.

\fBscheme-r5rs\fP is registered in the Debian alternatives system and can be
configured to point at \fBgsi\fP.

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B gsi
and
.B gsc
commands.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
The \fBGambit-C\fP programming system is a full implementation of the Scheme
language which conforms to the R4RS, R5RS, and IEEE Scheme standards.  It
consists of two main programs: \fBgsi\fP, the Gambit Scheme interpreter, and
\fBgsc\fP, the Gambit Scheme compiler.  The interpreter provides an
interactive environment with a debugger, while the compiler can produce
stand-alone executables or modules which can be linked or loaded at run time.
Interpreted code and compiled code can be freely mixed.  C modules can be
linked with Scheme modules.
.PP
The interpreter is executed in \fBinteractive mode\fP when no file or `\-' or
`\-e' option is given on the command line.  When at least one file or `\-' or
`\-e' option is present the interpreter is executed in \fBbatch mode\fP.
.PP
Entering \fB,q\fP or (exit) at the interpreter's command prompt will exit the
interpreter.
.PP
Entering \fB,?\fP at the interpreter's command prompt will display
a list of special commands.
.PP
In \fBbatch mode\fP the command line arguments denote files to be loaded, REPL
interactions to start (`\-' option), and expressions to be evaluated (`\-e'
option).  Note that the `\-' and `\-e' options can be interspersed with the
files on the command line and can occur multiple times.  The interpreter
processes the command line arguments from left to right, loading files with the
`load' procedure and evaluating expressions with the `eval' procedure in the
global interaction environment.  After this processing the interpreter exits.
.PP
\fBgsc-cc-o.bat\fP is a script called by \fBgsc\fP to generate object files during
compilation.  It takes its data from environment variables and is not intended
for user interaction.

.SH OPTIONS
A summary of options is included below.
For a complete description, see the Info files.
.TP
.B \-
Initiate a REPL at this point. (Continue by issuing a \fB,c\fP command at
the interpreter prompt)
.TP
.B \-:
Comma separated list of run-time options
.TP
.B \-e
Evaluate an expression.
.TP
.B \-f
Skip initialization file.
.TP
.B \-v
Show version of program.
.SH SEE ALSO
.br

The documentation for these programs is arguably too extensive to cover with
man pages.  Only the common command line options are given here.  The programs
are documented fully in \fBGambit-C\fP, available on-line at the Gambit-C
Homepage.  Once package gambc-doc is installed, this 200+ page document is
available via the Info system (info gambit-c), in html via doc-base, or as
files in /usr/share/doc/gambc (html, pdf, txt).

.br

The Debian package r5rs-doc provides the Revised(5) Report on the Algorithmic
Language Scheme in several formats.  That document is the defining
description of the programming language Scheme.

.br
\fBdhelp(1), gcc(1), update-alternatives(8)\fP
.SH COPYRIGHT
.br
Gambit-C is Copyright (c) 1994-2009 by Marc Feeley, all rights reserved.
.PP
Gambit-C is released under a dual LGPL and Apache 2 license.
.br
For further information refer to /usr/share/doc/gambc/copyright.
.PP
This manual page is
.br
Copyright (c) 2006-2009 Marc Feeley and Kurt B. Kaiser <kbk@shore.net>
.br
Released under the same license as Gambit-C.

.SH AUTHOR
Gambit-C was written by Marc Feeley <gambit@iro.umontreal.ca>.
.PP
Homepage: http://gambit.iro.umontreal.ca
